FEMALE SPEAKER:
Great, well, thank you
all so much for coming and
braving the rainy weather
and dreariness.
AUDIENCE: It's a
[INAUDIBLE] event.
FEMALE SPEAKER: I know.
I know.
But we got the hard-core
group here live in the room.
But as we just mentioned
to our panelists,
we actually have probably
several hundreds more
around the world in
different time zones,
watching you guys right now.
And we've got at
least a dozen people
saying, "Where's the
Livestream link?"
So just to let you
know that there
is a global audience that's
very interested in what
we're going to talk about.
And so today we have our Senior
Director of Media and Social
Products, Richard
Gingras, hosting
a panel of three very,
very respected editors
from [INAUDIBLE].
RICHARD GINGRAS: Great, thanks.
Whoops.
Forgot to turn this back on.
Great.
Well, thanks.
Glad you're here, and everyone
else who's participating
remotely.
I have to admit that
the title of this panel
is a little bit more pessimistic
than my own view of the future
of investigative journalism.
And I'm going to just put out
a couple of quick thoughts.
And obviously, I know
my panelists here
will be quick to
disagree, if they do.
But that also makes
good conversation.
The reason for my own optimism
is that with the internet,
we have, obviously, this
tremendous ability for everyone
with good thoughts to
get them out there.
We're not going
through gatekeepers.
In fact, the very fact that
these organizations exist
is because we have this
extraordinary thing called
the internet.
Secondly, I think we have
incredible new capabilities
available to us today to do
investigative work-- data
journalism being a
very key part of that.
And actually,
that's particularly
important in a world where big
data is increasingly important,
both for good and for bad.
We see it abused and disabused.
And certainly the
role of the press
in shining a light on how big
data is used with big data
analysis of its own, I
think, is really crucial.
And in that regard, not
only data journalism,
but I think we
have-- as you guys
have shown-- the opportunity
now to actually put out
important information
in different ways.
In past realms, investigative
reporting was an article.
Or five minutes on "60
Minutes" for a story.
But we can now do things
in different ways.
You can-- as
ProPublica has done--
create, in a sense, knowledge.
Utilities that are evergreen
and can provide ongoing value
to audiences beyond the
instance of the article.
I think these are hugely
important attributes
to the ecosystem as it evolves.
And while not every
one might agree,
I would actually
put forth that I
think the state of
investigative journalism today
is even today better than
what it was 20 years ago.
I think there's been no
small degree of romantization
of the past performance
of traditional media,
when it comes to
investigative journalism.
And now we have, I
think, many more voices
participating in doing
interesting things.
But even if I'm wrong in
my current assessment,
I think the opportunity,
the potential,
to do more and do more
interesting things is really
quite significant.
But I'm sure you guys will jump
in and tell me where I'm wrong.
And I am, on a regular basis, as
many people in this room know.
We won't pretend.
So first, let me do just
a very quick introduction
of our panelists.
Because then I'd like to turn
to them individually and let
them say a little bit
more about themselves,
their organizations,
and frankly, what
drives their passion in
doing what they're doing.
And particularly today,
because you are, really,
at the creative edge of
investigative journalism today.
So we have Robin Fields,
managing editor of ProPublica.
ProPublica has been
around now, what?
ROBIN FIELDS: Since 2008.
RICHARD GINGRAS: Since 2008.
has done a tremendous
amount of exquisite work.
Won, what, two Pulitzers now?
Just giving an indication of
the impact that they've had.
So great to hear from you.
And I know I've been
in my own conversations
with Paul Steiger
and Dick Tofel,
it's just been very
impressive to see
how the organization
has evolved.
In fact, Dick mentioned
to me recently
that you guys are actually
making money off of your data,
which I'd love to hear more
about when we get to that.
Alisa Barba is executive
editor of Inside Energy.
Again, the kind of
organization and editorial
focus that we wouldn't likely
have seen 20, 30 years ago--
that focus on a specific
area where people feel
there's an important
amount of journalistic work
that needs to be done.
So we'll love to hear
more about those efforts.
And then Andy Donohue
from the Center
for Investigative Reporting,
based over in Berkeley,
which has also done just ongoing
superb investigative work.
Superb work in
beginning to evolve
the models of engagement,
of presentation, of how
one builds a credible brand
in the world of the internet
and works to get the
results of your efforts
out to ever-larger audiences.
So I'm really honored to
have you all here today.
I think it's so important
for all of us here at Google
to really see the faces
and the people who
do this extraordinarily
important work.
Who take the risks and toil
hard for what is not likely
the most remunerative profession
you could have selected.
So we'll start with Andy.
A little bit more about
yourself and what drives you.
ANDY ANDY DONOHUE: Sure.
So I had sort of an
interesting moment college,
actually, as a
college journalist,
where I was working on
one of my first stories
and trying to think of some
different ways of doing
a story.
And I had my editor
tell me, "There
is no creativity in journalism."
That was a pretty
dispiriting remark
to hear as somebody
who was just getting
started who was really
interested in journalism,
but also trying to
think about doing things
in a little different way.
And what has been, I think,
most exciting to me in my career
and what's changed
in the last, maybe,
10 years is not that
there wasn't creativity
in journalism, but it's really
being unleashed right now.
You just have so many
different models.
So many different
ways of storytelling.
And so many different types
of organizations and types
of reporting.
Different technology.
That not only is creativity
part of journalism,
but it's really, really,
highly valued right now.
And it's part of the lifeboat,
everybody understanding
that this is how we
create the new journalism.
My background is,
before being at CIR,
I was a Knight
Fellow at Stanford.
And then also,
before that, I was
at Voice of San Diego,
which was a start-up-- one
of the first nonprofit
start-ups to pop up.
We basically were
created because people
were very unhappy with the
local media in San Diego
and had wanted to create a
new publication for a really
long time.
And every time
they looked at it,
they would get into the cost
of trying to print a newspaper,
buy all the paper, get
the trucks, the gas.
All that infrastructure
took up 2/3 of your costs.
And so it never made
sense, and they could never
scale it in an interesting way.
And then in about
2004, we sort of
realized that the internet was
ready to hold a legitimate news
organization.
And that for-profit
wasn't the way
to go, because the
advertising revenue was
starting to decline,
or going to decline.
So we went non-profit,
and that's, I guess,
the model that supports
all three of us here.
ALISA ALISA BARBA:
Yeah, for good or bad.
So I go back a lot
farther than a lot
of people working in
journalism these days.
And I was thinking about
this as I was coming up here,
because part of what we're
going to be talking about
is the tools that we
use to do what we do.
And I was thinking
about my earliest tool.
This was 30 years ago,
and I was a news clipper
in the Newsweek
office in Beijing.
So that was my first
journalism job.
And there was this
little, teeny tool--
I don't know if
anybody remembers it--
where you could actually
cut through the newspapers.
Right?
You remember those?
I went looking for it
this morning to bring.
I wanted to show you.
You'd clip the
newspaper articles
and you'd stick it
in a folder and you'd
stick it in a big
filing cabinet.
And this was your source
of information for stories
that you were doing.
You had communism, Maoism,
agriculture, whatever.
And in those days-- I
was trying to remember.
I think, was it teletype
machine to send the stories
from Beijing?
I don't even remember.
It eventually evolved
to fax machines.
And then, obviously, to today.
So Inside Energy, the
group that I work with,
is very, very small, certainly
compared to these guys.
I have five reporters on staff.
One is a data journalist.
We're in the center of the
country-- Denver, Wyoming,
and North Dakota.
We're covering the energy boom.
What's going on there.
And we're trying
to figure it out.
We're trying to make it work.
We're public media.
We do television
and we do radio.
And we also do digital,
obviously, as everybody does.
We have one data journalist.
And we're trying to go
deep into these stories
and uncover the good, the bad,
and the ugly about the oil
and gas boom and
what's going on there.
We're doing it with
a very small staff.
And I have some really great
questions for you guys,
when that comes.
RICHARD GINGRAS: Great.
And Robin.
ROBIN FIELDS: I started
at ProPublica in 2008,
when it was mostly an empty room
and sort of an idea for what
we'd like to accomplish.
And our mission has
always been to do stories
that have an impact
and that spark change.
And it's been amazing to
see, over the six years
that I've been there,
that we've been
able to accomplish that so much.
It's just been an
amazing ride so far.
We are nonprofit.
Today we are not an
empty room at all.
We're almost squeezing
out of our original space.
We're 45 journalists,
ten of whom
are basically data
journalists and developers.
And as Richard was saying,
data and data applications
are central to our work and
central to our mission, in that
not only do they allow us
to do the stories that we do
and sort of quantify things
and use tools that journalists
didn't used to use, but
they allow other reporters
to take our stories
and localize them.
Our Dollars for
Docs application,
for example-- which
is just one of them--
has been used by something like
180 other news organizations
to write stories of their own.
And it shows you how
an organization that's
45 people, most of
them in New York,
can have a ripple effect
that goes on and on.
And I think that so
much of our challenge
is always to-- as you
were saying-- be creative.
Cut through the outrage fatigue,
the numbness, the noise,
to try to do stories that stay
with people and do make change.
So that's pretty much our story.
RICHARD GINGRAS: As
I noted, each of you
are in relatively
new organizations.
CIR has been around the
longest in a pre-digital form,
actually.
But given that, and
given your experience,
and given that all three
of you really come out
of traditional
media organizations
in your backgrounds-- what's
the advice you would give the LA
Times, ABC News, as they
struggle with change?
Do you do you have
any advice for them?
ANDY DONOHUE: I think
maybe one thing would
be not to try to be
everything to everybody.
I mean, there's one
thing, one of the threads
you can run through all
of us, which is really
trying to be specialized and
focused in certain things.
And that's what you're
seeing in all kinds
of different start-ups
whether they be the Marshall
project, which is a new
nonprofit start-up that's just
about criminal justice
issues, or if it's Vox, just
about explaining things.
And even you see the
New York Times sort
of moving this way
now, that they're
starting to build
more micro-sites.
They have a whole cooking
site, which has totally
revolutionized the
eating in my family.
They've got The Upshot,
which is sort of election.
The internet organizes
itself around communities.
It doesn't really organize
itself around general interest.
And so what you're
starting to see
is just a lot more organizing
around communities.
And what it looks like is,
you organize communities
and then maybe if you
organize a bunch of them,
then it ends up becoming general
interest in some of them.
RICHARD GINGRAS: Robin?
Alisa?
ROBIN FIELDS: Well, I think that
what we were seeing happening
in a lot of these
organizations--
the idea that you could cut your
way to the future-- I think,
people have sort of realised
the futility of that.
And I think the path
forward probably does
lie exactly where
Andy was saying.
I think that it's tough to--
it's kind of like they're
trying to take this giant
Lincoln Continental.
They're driving down the
highway at 60 miles an hour
and trying to turn
it into a Prius
while they're still driving it.
And I in some ways have a
lot of compassion for that,
because they still
have to deal with so
many of the expectations
of the past.
And also, so much
of their revenue
is still coming from paper.
So I guess if I had a business
model that would work for them,
I'd probably be in a different
line of work than I am today.
But I don't think that
they have the option
of going non-profit and
funding themselves our way.
So they're going
to have a soldier
forward in a different way.
ALISA BARBA: And those
organizations-- you know,
the LA Times, the New
York Times, all those guys
--they're still built
on fabulous reporters,
great storytelling.
And I think that what we
have learned, whether you're
in the profit or the
non-profit sector,
is that great reporting
will find a way
to pay for itself,
one way or the other.
Whether it's smaller,
leaner, deeper.
Those are the key elements.
RICHARD GINGRAS:
Well so far, anyways,
it seems that at
least in your efforts,
that great reporting
is finding a way.
But let me go to the other
extreme and ask you this.
As I said, I have a
rather optimistic view
from an architectural
perspective.
But what scares you?
What makes you
nervous as you try
to move your efforts forward?
ALISA BARBA: I'll
just say that we
are funded right now through
a grant from the Corporation
for Public Broadcasting,
which has sought
to foster local journalism
centers across the country.
So what I'm scared of is
when the CPB money goes away.
So basically, when our
grant funding ends,
we have to find a model
for sustainability that
is going to be something
along the lines of what
these guys do.
But again, we're
only six, seven.
And we're based
in states without
a huge philanthropic community.
We're not New York
or San Francisco.
We're in North
Dakota and Wyoming,
and frankly a lot of
people in those states
don't listen to public radio
and don't watch public TV.
I think the what they call the
cume-- the amount of people who
listen to us, it's maybe 5%
to 10% on a really good--
really good-- week.
So finding sustainability
within these local communities
is really the nut that
we're trying to crack.
And if you look at, I think,
large national organizations--
which these guys
both qualify as-- you
have a better,
easier, time of it
frankly, than local
non-profit journalists.
RICHARD GINGRAS: So
we're going to actually
go to questions, shortly.
In fact, we have
the Dory somewhere.
The Dory is our internal
tool so that anyone
can surface questions
for this gathering.
They don't have to
be here in the room.
And I'm sure there
are good ones,
and we'll begin
with those shortly.
In fact, gladly begin now.
If there's a question in the
room, we can go right to that.
Open this up broadly.
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE].
So given the funding challenges,
are news organizations
starting to do less emphasis on
the exclusive and more emphasis
on finding the story?
Whether that would mean
aligning with competitors.
Another way the movie
industry [INAUDIBLE]
came together to [INAUDIBLE].
ROBIN FIELDS: Well,
speaking for us,
we've always been sort of a
serial collaborator or partner.
We're always looking to partner
with other news organizations
on our stories.
And I think that
it's interesting
because we've seen
investigative reporting-- which
was once just perceived
as super-competitive, only
competitive, only
"mine, mine, mine" kind
of an attitude-- change
completely into something where
we want people to not only
partner with us on our stories,
we want them to
follow stories, do
stories modeled on our stories.
We routinely release
our stories and then
put out a reporter's
recipe for our stories
to spark other
people's journalism.
Because ultimately,
for us the mission
isn't just to be able to
stamp a giant "ProPublica"
on everything--
although that's fine,
so if you want to do
that, go right ahead--
but to have an
impact in this world.
And have a story that
makes a difference.
So we have partnered
probably with,
at this point, a couple
hundred news organizations.
And we're always looking
to find new partners.
So yes, in answer to that.
ANDY DONOHUE: I think that's
a really important result
of this business model, is that
when you do talk to funders
they want to know what the
impact of your story is.
I mean, that's what
they're putting money into
and that's what they've funded.
They're used funding other
things like education reform
or environmentalism,
where they do
want to see the impact of that.
Sometimes it's a
fine line to walk.
We can't be political
advocates for certain things.
But that's generally not
that hard to figure out.
But what they don't care
is who gets the credit.
Unless it's them.
Just kidding.
We've partnered.
Even though you
could say that we
compete for maybe some
of the same grants,
or something like that.
We've partnered on
stories together.
But a really
important part of that
is localizing data so
that when we do a story,
and we'll get statewide
or nationwide data,
we are in an active
pursuit of trying
to find local publications
to get that out and do that.
And that's just a whole
different world in the way
that we collaborate
than we used to.
ALISA BARBA: Right.
And so we, as a
small organization,
we can take the data
from one of these guys
if they're doing a big
data dive on some story.
And not only can we
localize it, but we can
also-- we're in
different mediums.
So I do radio and television.
So a lot of these guys
focus is on print.
[INAUDIBLE] does a lot of
radio and television too.
But I can put you on NPR.
I can get that megaphone
onto your story,
which is always good.
RICHARD GINGRAS: In fact,
all three of you, all three
of your organizations
do, in a sense,
syndicate your content in a
quest for larger audiences.
Last time I talked
to Robert Rosenthal,
he was talking about
how much effort
you put into measuring
impact, which I think
is a great thing to do.
But you, I know, had
a question before,
which I think would be
good to raise for the group
and see if we can find
an answer for you.
ALISA BARBA: OK, so, again, this
is a small news organization's
problem.
This is not probably
their problem.
Inside Energy is our group.
We have our website,
insideenergy.org,
and we all put a lot of
attention into our website.
We make it pretty.
We make it beautiful.
We do a lot of data.
Then we also have seven
partners across our region
who take our digital content
and put it on their sites
as well, because they don't
have anybody doing this.
So part of our mission
is to raise capacity.
Is to take smaller newsrooms
and give them news stories
that they can put on there
and make them sound better.
But digitally, that screws us.
We lose our juice
when our one story
is on seven different
digital platforms.
So, Google, do you guys
have a solution for me?
What can I do?
I know we can customize
all the local content
and make it different.
But basically that's
been a huge problem.
RICHARD GINGRAS: In a sense,
how to maintain your Google
juice, as it were?
ALISA BARBA: Here's the issue,
is that our own website-- we're
supposed to be
serving our partners.
We're supposed to make
them all look better.
Our website, the way we
sold it to them, we said,
we're just archival. .
We just need a little
place to put it
but we're doing all kinds
of digital-only content
that our partners are reluctant
to publish because of the fact
that it basically doesn't
seem to raise all boats.
Does that make sense?
RICHARD GINGRAS: I think so.
I'll touch on one part of it,
and if others have perspective
in the room, I'd
like you to jump in.
Because one thing-- and
what I was picking up
in earlier conversations--
is that issue of,
if we're syndicating
our content,
how do we do it in
such a fashion that we
as the organization and
wrote the canonical article,
in a sense, retain
primary value.
Which, by the way,
is not a question
that just comes from
small organizations.
The New York Times,
obviously, syndicates content.
And we've had similar
discussions with them.
So in that specific point, there
are some things you can do.
The simplest right now is
simply to have your syndication
partners, when they're putting
your content on their sites,
is to make sure
there's a "noindex"
tag in the articles, which
means that we won't crawl that.
We won't include
that in our index.
We'll actually then find yours.
There's another tag
called "rel=canonical"
which you can also use.
And ultimately, it
might be better,
but that is being used across
the industry isn't as clear.
[INAUDIBLE] Make use of that.
But others here
might have thoughts
about your general
question, or correct me
if they think I'm wrong in my
answer to that specific point.
AUDIENCE: I don't
have a question.
But since I have [INAUDIBLE].
Something big is happening
in investigative journalism,
at least [INAUDIBLE],
the "Serial" podcast.
And I was just wondering
what you thought about that.
ANDY DONOHUE: I was
listening to it on my way.
On my drive here.
AUDIENCE: Me too.
I'm halfway through it.
How do you think that affects
the industry, especially
the non-profit,
public [INAUDIBLE].
RICHARD GINGRAS: First I
want to quickly repeat.
How does the
increased popularity
of "Serial" podcasting
impact your work?
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
ANDY DONOHUE: I
think it's fabulous.
I mean, there's a
few different points,
but one is just like
the way that she
opens up and so
honest about her quest
and her process is in
itself half of what's
fascinating about that show.
And so she's just sort of turned
a lot of what we do inside out.
I mean, we all
have-- there's always
interesting stories
about both what
you're doing when
you're reporting,
or also just the
doubts you have.
I mean, a key
element of that show
is how much you wrestles
with what the truth is.
And we don't like to admit
that, but we're always
doing that with a story.
Where you're not quite sure.
Am I even on this story?
Is this guy guilty?
Innocent?
I mean, just to freely
and openly grapple
with that, I think,
is really liberating.
I hope that's a key feature
of investigative reporting
in the future.
And then just the quest
narrative, in general,
is just such a powerful way of
telling a story that we haven't
really harnessed very much
in investigative reporting,
as well.
ALISA BARBA: It just
basically gives us
a new way to tell a story.
And I mean, my staff is a
bunch of podcast addicts.
And they're just
going nuts about it.
So now every story is going
to become a "Serial" podcast.
RICHARD GINGRAS:
Question from the Dory?
Oh, question from Marisha.
AUDIENCE: That actually
goes into a question
that I've been wondering.
I sort of have this [INAUDIBLE].
ANDY DONOHUE:
That's the fun part.
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]
ROBIN FIELDS: Well,
I think we often
start with a lead or a tip
or something like that.
But the truth of
the matter is, we
may have an idea what the
minimum story would be.
But as my boss is fond of
saying, whenever asked about,
"What's the best story that
could come out of this?"
The best story that could come
out of this is one that we
cannot even imagine today.
And that's what's
exciting about it.
It's what's volatile about it.
And in some ways,
investigative stories
are always the stories where
the people you're writing about,
or the thing you
are writing about,
often don't want
you to do the story.
So they're often stories that
are difficult because you
get very little cooperation.
When people get a call from
someone from ProPublica
they kind of know
the story is not
going to be puppies, clowns,
the latest press release.
So we're constantly
having to overcome that.
And the challenges
and twists and turns
of an investigative story,
to someone who did them.
Is endlessly fascinating.
But the great thing
is you can get
somewhere way more interesting
and better than you
ever, ever imagined.
The truth is usually
stranger than you think.
RICHARD GINGRAS: Can you give
a few insights into your craft,
in that regard?
I mean, I often observe--
I have several friends who
are reporters, and
I'm always amused
at how good they are about
getting me to talk about things
that I wasn't necessarily
comfortable talking about.
And you're like, "How
did you do that?"
You're not going to
tell us, are you?
ROBIN FIELDS: I think that
one of the amazing things
about a life as a
reporter is you're often
talking to people on the best
or the worst day of their lives.
And they do this
amazing thing, which
is that they trust you
with their stories.
They trust you with their lives.
They trust you with these things
that they haven't told anybody
else, sometimes.
I mean, we just brought out
this story about Firestone
in Liberia and their
dealings with Charles Taylor,
the warlord.
And one of the crucial
interviews for this story--
a story that was reported
over the course of a year--
we didn't get that interview
until maybe a week, or a week
and a half before publication.
We'd been trying to talk to
this person for seven months.
So trust-building takes time.
It takes persistence.
But he hadn't talked
about what happened
to him there for 23 years.
And he finally spoke to us.
And to be trusted
with somebody's story
like that-- it's an amazing
thing, and something
that you carry with
you all the time.
Your trust with these people
who give you their stories.
I can still remember
conversations
that I had where I remember
knocking on somebody's door
and interviewing them
about something terrible
their son had done.
And I was talking to this
man, the guy's father,
and this big, burly
Irishman burst into tears.
And I was just like,
"Oh my goodness!"
And that is the amazing part
of being a reporter, I think,
is those kinds of
experiences that you
have that stay with you.
And become part of the
story that you then
share with other people.
ALISA BARBA: But
there's plenty of doors
that get slammed
in your face too.
You've got the guy bursting in
tears, and then you've got--
I mean, I remember
as a reporter--
I worked for the
MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour,
and I was on the Middle
East beat out of Washington.
And part of my job
was-- I don't know,
it's probably all before
everybody's time--
but there was a bunch of
hostages being held in Iran.
And across the Middle East.
I don't really remember
the circumstances.
But my job, every time
there was news about this,
was to call the families
and to get a quote.
So there's nastiness too.
Real nastiness.
ANDY DONOHUE: Just to
build on that a little bit.
It's interesting how important,
in these kind of stories, just
story selection is.
Like, picking the right stories.
Because you do spend a year,
18 months, on the story.
And it is a high-wire act.
It's amazing to me how
many different stories
I've done that that key
source didn't come out
till right at the end.
And you're like,
"What the hell would
this nine months of my life
been if this person hadn't
out of the blue emailed
me and decided to talk?"
And so if you're
a daily reporter,
you pick the wrong story,
that that scar lasts for a day
and you move onto the next one.
And so actually
like figuring out
how to pick the right
stories, and when
to give up on one when
it's not bearing fruit
is really, really
tough calculus.
RICHARD GINGRAS: We're
going to go to the Dory
and then we'll come
back to Maggie.
"As nonprofit
organizations, how do you
ensure that donors
and their donations
never influence your reporting?"
ROBIN FIELDS: It's funny.
In my previous life, in
commercial journalism,
we had the same question but
it was about advertisers.
This is an issue
that we've always
dealt with in journalism.
And I think that independence
is just something
that you accrue every day.
I mean, I can sit here
and say, of course
our donors have nothing to
do with the stories we choose
or how we do them.
And that's completely true.
But you'll be the judge of
that by seeing what we do
and how we do it.
We are very, very
scrupulous about what
strings we will allow to
be attached to any money
that we take.
We would never, for example,
take money to do a story.
Because investigative reporting
goes where it goes, and we're
not going to be limited in what
we report by virtue of promises
that we make like that.
And we've set up a lot of
limits on that kind of thing,
to make sure that
that never happens.
But again, independence is--
the proof is in the pudding.
RICHARD GINGRAS: You
know, I've always
felt that having worked
in public broadcasting
myself, as well as in
commercial media, there
is no revenue model.
There is no financial
support model for journalism
that doesn't come with the
potential for conflict.
It is, as you say,
in the fastidiousness
of those in that
organization do adhere
to the principles of how
and why you do what you do
ANDY DONOHUE: I always say that
nonprofit journalism is not
any more holy than for-profit.
It is just as much dependent on
the firewalls and the systems
you set up.
There's these interesting
sort of sweet spots
you have to find.
Because when you do get
grants, people generally
want to have an idea
of what kind of stuff
you're going to cover.
They may fund environmental
coverage, or something.
So we have to figure out, yes,
we will undertake an endeavor
to find out the most
toxic areas of California.
But after that, you
don't get to pick.
That's a very broad area.
We'll look at the data.
But after that, you don't get
to pick what stories we do,
who, does them.
Anything like that.
And so you can't get like really
on granular what stories you're
doing, but at the
same time you have
to figure out how you
can make what you're
going to do appealing to donors.
ALISA BARBA: And
just one last thought
is I think donors or advertisers
or supporters or underwriters
don't often understand that.
What we take for
granted, and we know
as the absolute basis of
funding for journalism.
There's a firewall between
editorial and fundraising.
I would have to say
until very recently, I
had absolutely nothing
to with fundraising.
But again, this is part
of the brave new world
and we're all raising money
for our operations as we go.
But oftentimes, funders
will be astonished
to know that they can't have
a say in what the product is.
ANDY DONOHUE: And
it's interesting
because I think people think
that because they're not
a for-profit business,
that it may not be corrupt.
Right?
Or there may not be a
problem in asking for that.
Because they're not
like an old card dealer
at the newspaper hoping
to not get tough coverage.
Like, they're not
making money off of it.
They just have a viewpoint.
But the fact of matter is, they
have a viewpoint and an agenda.
And that can't drive
what we're doing, either.
That's not as black and white
or as easy to explain to people.
RICHARD GINGRAS: We're
going to Maggie Shields.
Maggie Shields used
to work at the BBC.
And then this weekend,
when I was hosting an AMA
with Daniel Ellsberg,
the challenge
was to as him a question that
he'd never been asked before.
Which was a pretty
big challenge.
And she won.
So beware.
AUDIENCE: My question
is about [INAUDIBLE].
RICHARD GINGRAS: Basically, I'm
going to go at that last part.
How do you, in
your work, do work
that lasts longer than the
instance of the article?
ANDY DONOHUE: That is
really important question
that we're wrestling with right
now, because the old model
that even CIR used to do, was
drop the big investigation
and just walk away.
And now online, you have
to have a community that's
ready to take that.
Unless it's just
some blockbuster.
And so one thing that
we're working on right now
is thinking of these as
investigations in context.
So that we have, maybe,
researchers or newer reporters
constantly writing about the
themes that we've decided
are important.
Public service kind of stuff,
or investigative things.
So that there is sort of
an audience built up that's
ready and knows we might be
interested in these things
when the story drops.
And then when the story drops--
this is an idea, actually,
that the editor Stephen
Engelberg at ProPublica,
I sort of stole from him.
His idea that he
had talked about,
and what they think
about is campaigns.
Where you drop a
story, but then you
have all these other
things that come out
so that you find
ways to continuously
be in the news cycle,
beyond just that one day.
And then creating durable and
sustainable data, I think,
is also a really important part.
Because we put so much work
into the searchable data
apps that we create,
that they can't just
stand for that one story.
They have to have uses beyond
what that one story is.
RICHARD GINGRAS: In fact,
with ProPublica-- and this is
an example I often
cite-- you've continued
to make available this
knowledge utility on the state
of dialysis treatment centers.
So I can understand
which one I should use,
should I need that help.
Does that play a part as well?
ROBIN FIELDS: Well, that was
my project as a reporter,
so now you're just--
[LAUGHING] Oh, yes!
Absolutely.
We want to create resources
both for the consuming public
and for the journalistic
community that have enduring
value, and that can be refreshed
and renewed all the time.
We want to-- first
of all, we follow up.
We follow up relentlessly
on our investigations.
I think we've
probably done, I don't
know, somewhere between 150
and 200 stories about fracking.
And I can guarantee you right
now that if people are waiting
for us to go away on that
one, we're not gonna.
I don't want to reveal
the ending or anything,
but that's not going to happen.
So that's part of it.
And I think for something
like-- we created something
for a project that we have yet
to do on patient harm, that
is in itself-- we have a
Facebook community of thousands
of members, and that in and of
itself has produced stories.
And I'd anticipate that
that has a lifespan
of many, many, many years.
So I think that, as Andy
was saying, that there's
a lot of different ways that
we keep a project relevant.
And we don't just drop
a bomb and run away.
ALISA BARBA: You know,
we're six months old.
[LAUGHTER]
RICHARD GINGRAS: A question
from the cloud, as it were.
"What role do amateur
bloggers and individuals
sharing ad hoc messages, photos,
and video via social media
play in modern
investigative journalism?
Does leveraging
these sources enable
more targeted investments by
professional journalists?"
ROBIN FIELDS: You know, I
think that from my perspective,
that's been more of a resource
for breaking news in places
that reporters
can't get to than it
has been for
investigative reporters.
RICHARD GINGRAS: Maybe
I'm incorrect here,
but I thought
ProPublica specifically
had, around one
area of exploration,
sort of done crowdsourcing.
ROBIN FIELDS: Oh, we
have done crowdsourcing.
And we have done-- mostly
we do a very directed kind
of crowdsourcing.
We did a project
called Free the Files.
And that was about
political spending
on political ads,
which at one time
were very difficult to
track because the FCC,
at first, wasn't putting
any of this data online.
They had to go to
television stations
and say, give us
your political file.
Who did that?
Nobody.
And then eventually they did
put some of this stuff online,
and it was in completely
ridiculous, undigestible form,
as these things are in
their first iteration.
PDFs that nobody could
make hide nor hair of.
And we harnessed a group
of more than 1,000 people
to basically take that
mishmash and turn it into data.
And we actually put
together a database
of more than $1 billion of
TV spending in the run-up
to the 2012
presidential election.
And I think what that
showed was that if you
can give the crowd an
interesting and vital task,
and give them a way to do it in
a uniform and standardized way,
that there is potential to
use that for investigations,
and to use that just to
inform the public on something
it needs to know.
RICHARD GINGRAS: But to
the original point of,
can it stimulate
an investigation?
What Daniel Ellsberg
would say if he was here,
and what he said loud and
clear on Saturday night, was
how do we stimulate
more whistle-blowing?
And how can journalists
find other additional ways
to ferret out whistle-blowing?
Because obviously the state
of affairs in whistle-blowing
in the United States
isn't terribly good--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
ROBIN FIELDS: Federal
government to stop
prosecuting whistle-blowers?
RICHARD GINGRAS: Which is,
of course, his key point,
is we've had more whistle-blower
prosecutions in the last six
years and we had
in the last 100.
ALISA BARBA: Yeah, I think
whistle-blowers, though,
are different than
amateur bloggers.
That is much, much
more of a pointed--
where they may go to
ProPublica, or they
may go to CIR or
something like that.
We use this thing called the
Public Inside Network, which
is a public media thing, where
we have people who basically
signed up to kind of
provide us with stories.
So this is, again,
targeted crowdsourcing
of people who are already
kind of in your community.
That's something we do a lot of.
RICHARD GINGRAS: Question?
Paul?
AUDIENCE: So with
the rapid transfer
from old ways of consuming
news to these new form
factors and the context that
comes with their [INAUDIBLE],
how is that changing the way in
which you package and deliver
investigative reporting?
ANDY DONOHUE: I think
in a very basic way
you're thinking about
the mobile phone.
I'm thinking about the phone
as I'm editing stories,
and seeing what it looks like.
Right?
Now, a great narrative is a
great narrative no matter what.
Long format isn't going away.
But what we've tried
to do is give people
a lot of different
entries into a story,
and package it in
different ways depending
on what kind of consumer
or what kind of condition
you may be in when
you're consuming it.
We just had a story last week
about the dangerous pesticides
that are used in the
strawberry industry.
That's an 8,000- word
narrative with five chapters,
but it's also a
listicle, "Seven Things
You Should Know Before You
Eat Your First Strawberry."
It's also a quick,
four-minute animation
that is narrated by Roman Mars.
It's also data app.
So it's just sort of finding
all these different ways.
But then also making sure,
first and foremost when
we're looking at what the
design is, that it just
fits on the phone.
RICHARD GINGRAS: Yes?
AUDIENCE: I have a question
about data sources.
[INAUDIBLE] Are there
any data sources
that you wish you had access to?
[INAUDIBLE]
ROBIN FIELDS: I wish
I had subpoena power.
[LAUGHTER]
But I sense that's
not going to happen.
But certainly, we use
any and all databases
that we can get out of state,
local, and federal government.
That's just sort of the standby.
I think Dollars for Docs, which
has come up a couple times,
and is our database that
we sort of scraped out
of, at that point, I
think, seven or eight--
and now it's more than that--
drug companies' information
that they've been forced to put
online because of settlements
with the government.
And they put it
online in the way
exactly that you'd
think they would,
so that no one could ever
possibly understand or use it.
So we took all that.
We scraped it together and made
a usable database out of it.
And I think that that's
a lot of what we do,
which is take data
which exists but make it
into a useful and
accessible thing.
A living thing.
But we will accept interesting
and leaked data too,
so if you happen
to know anybody--
ANDY DONOHUE: Governments
could essentially half of us
out of business if they
just made their data usable.
Maybe I shouldn't say that.
ALISA BARBA: I was
thinking the same thing.
ROBIN FIELDS: I think
you're right, sadly.
ALISA BARBA: We all of
us rely on government
regulatory agencies,
basically, for our data.
And most of it is
so unusable that we
are employed to try to
figure out what it all means.
And then to make
a story around it.
But if, for instance, if
they had a whole bunch of you
guys working for
them and they really
could figure out how
to make data useful,
then everybody would know.
ANDY DONOHUE: I'd love
to be able to pose
that question to our data team,
though, and get back to you.
I know one thing that
we've struggled with
is we do a decent amount
of work on farm workers.
And there is almost
no reliable data
because they're undocumented
workers who will just not
interface with the
government in any way.
So if you're dealing with
sexual abuse, sexual harassment,
pesticide poisoning, all
these kind of things.
There is some data on
it, but it's just junk.
And so one of the
things that we've
been trying to play
with is how to actually,
are there interesting
ways to create that data.
ROBIN FIELDS: Another
area which is always
sort of a data disaster
that is really frustrating
is that anything having
to do with the courts
is chopped up by jurisdiction.
And everybody wants to know
national things about what's
happening in criminal
justice, and there's just
no way to do it.
Forget about the civil system.
I think that so much
is done state-to-state
that we'd really benefit
from a national picture.
So that's something.
I know last year
we did something
on injuries involving
temp workers.
And we ended up doing an
analysis that had never
been undertaken before,
involving four or five states'
worth of workers' comp data.
And it's just amazing that--
ALISA BARBA: Nobody does it.
ROBIN FIELDS: Yeah,
that isn't there.
That we don't know the answers
to these very basic questions,
even in the sea of
data that we have.
ALISA BARBA: Right.
It's sea of data.
So covering energy and
fracking, and you're
trying to compare regulatory
climates in Pennsylvania, North
Dakota, Texas, Colorado,
where it's all different
and everybody posts it in a
different way, if they post it.
Yeah.
That's what we do.
ANDY DONOHUE: Sorry to belabor
this, but one other thing too.
I think in education there's
actually too much data.
I feel like you can
find a piece of data
to make every case you want.
So it's like this
cacophony of data.
ROBIN FIELDS: And the Department
of Education data is filthy.
It's awful.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
RICHARD GINGRAS:
It's all filthy.
Probably our last
question, and I
think it's an interesting one.
It's how do you budget
a story, cost-wise?
Which actually reminds me.
I worked at CPB about
40 million years ago,
and we were funding a
documentary series on death
and dying.
And the key
character was a woman
who was suffering from
a terminal illness.
And I was going to follow
her until her demise.
And her prognosis at the time
we started it was six months.
And then went to 12 months.
And then it went to 18 months.
Which, suffice to say, caused
a tremendous amount of angst
on the part of the funders.
[LAUGHTER]
ROBIN FIELDS: You were
like, "There's good news
and there's bad news."
[LAUGHTER]
RICHARD GINGRAS: So
how do you do it?
ANDY DONOHUE: Well,
you really don't.
I mean, I don't know that's
politically correct to say.
But you kind of let the
stories go where they go.
And if it's really good,
we find ways to pay for it.
And if it's really
not good, then we
try to shut down as
fast as possible.
We had a donor event yesterday
based on the strawberry story,
and our executive
director estimated
that it cost $500,000.
And we had no way of
knowing that's what
it was going to cost.
I would hate to know if
I came in from the start
and said, "Hey guys, this
is going to cost $500,000"
if I would have
gotten it approved.
But everybody kept
getting into it
and it kept getting
more interesting.
And so just kind of felt right.
ROBIN FIELDS: Well, I think
also, just to keep in mind,
the single-most expensive
item in any story
is usually the
journalist's time.
And it's as you were
saying, you don't
know how long it will
take to do the story,
but you're going to do
it till you've got it.
And that's an unknowable
thing at the beginning,
as you were saying.
But that's the way
it's always been.
It's interesting that
this issue of cost
bubbles up to the surface
in organizations like ours.
And yet it was exactly the
same at a traditional legacy
organization, but it was sort
of hidden in a larger editorial
budget, so you didn't
itemize these things.
But I think in
smaller organizations
that focus on very
resource-intensive work,
that question is one that we
come up against all the time.
RICHARD GINGRAS: So
we're almost out of time.
I'm going to close with a simple
question to all three of you.
But before I do, I
want to A, thank you
for your time and your
eloquence in being here today.
And I also want to
say-- and I think
I can speak for everyone
in the room-- I just
want to thank you for the
tremendous work that you do.
The passion you put into it.
It's hugely important.
And I know you do it
for higher purposes
than making gobs
and gobs of money.
In today's world that's
a remarkable thing.
And I think we couldn't
thank you enough for that.
But in closing, let's
add if each of you
have a comment on,
again, what drives you?
Why do you love what you do?
What makes you get
up in the morning?
ANDY DONOHUE: I think
this is the best
time alive to be a
user of journalism.
I mean, just the amount
of different sources.
The way to get it.
The democratization
of information.
To me, it's just incredibly
exciting to be a part of that.
I think we're at this
incredible moment
where journalism completely
underwent a revolution
over the last decade,
but we haven't
known where that was
going to be going.
And we're starting to
get a better sense.
And I think-- as,
Richard, you write
a lot-- this isn't a
thing where we're just
going from A to B.
Now we're in a state
of constant transformation.
And that's really exciting, to
not just step in and do a job
that people have always
done, but step in
and do this job that gets
to be redefined every day.
And to be a part of
that is just incredible.
ALISA BARBA: Yes.
Ditto.
Absolutely.
All that is awesome.
I work with five or six
journalists who are all
aged 28 to 32, and they are so
jazzed about what we're doing.
They're so excited.
They want to do
"Serial" podcasts.
They want to do everything.
For a legacy journalist,
it keeps me young.
I love it.
And just even from the get-go,
even back 30 years ago when
I began, journalism
is the best job
because you come in
to work every day
and you learn something new
and you tell stories about it.
So I just love it.
RICHARD GINGRAS: Robin?
ROBIN FIELDS: Well,
I think that what
drives me is the
same thing that's
driven ProPublica
from the start.
We have this mission statement
that when we put out there
I almost thought
it was too much.
It talked about doing
stories of moral force.
And I was almost embarrassed
to realize how much I actually
believe in that.
We're all supposed to be
hard-bitten, irreverent sorts,
and not allow ourselves to
indulge in such thoughts.
But actually, I really
do believe in that.
And I do believe in
our job as reporters
to bring accountability
and to bring transparency
to this world.
I believe that
without that, we can't
have our country as it is.
We need to have this
information to be citizens.
And, I mean, as we've seen
over the last couple of years
with the stories about the
NSA and so forth, there
is such an important role for
journalists-- particularly
investigative journalists-- to
play in keeping things the way
we want them in this society.
So anyway, still a
little embarrassed.
But still a believer, I suppose.
RICHARD GINGRAS:
You're talking to folks
at a company that has the
motto "Don't do evil."
So I think the moral
force thing actually
registers quite
strongly with us.
Thank you very, very much
for your being here today.
[APPLAUSE]